JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
scramble for
Republicans and a close race for
Democrats.
Candidates have one last day to
campaign until
voting tomorrow in South
Carolina and Nevada,
making a perfect Friday preview
for Mark Shields
and David Brooks. They are here
to analyze
the week's news.
Then: a report from the Greek
island of Lesbos,
where winter weather has done
little to stem
the flow of refugees.
MAN: A normal day. The boat have
a problem
with the engine. It cannot move.
The people
inside, we have too many
children, two sick
guys, in this case, we have to
put on board
and take them ashore to have a
medical test.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we remember
Harper Lee,
author of the classic novel "To
Kill a Mockingbird."
She died today at age 89.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thousands of
people, among
them President and Mrs. Obama,
paid final
respects today to Supreme Court
Justice Antonin
Scalia. He died last Saturday at
the age of
79, and lay in repose today at
the building
where he had worked since 1986.
Hari Sreenivasan has our report.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was a day
of solemn scenes
at the land's highest court,
starting with
the flag-covered casket being
carried past
men and women who clerked for
Scalia during
his 30 years as a justice.
The procession moved into the
Great Hall,
passing the eight remaining
justices, and
the casket was placed on a
funeral bier first
used after President Lincoln's
assassination.
Then, a private ceremony, with
the justice's
widow and children looking on,
as his son,
Reverend Paul Scalia, read the
Lord's Prayer.
REV. PAUL SCALIA, Son of Antonin
Scalia: Our
father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy
name. Thy kingdom come, thy will
be done on
earth, as is it is in heaven.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Throughout the
day, former
clerks stood vigil, occasionally
wiping away
tears, as the court opened for
public viewing.
Visitors ranged from tourists,
to members
of Congress, to federal appeals
Judges Sri
Srinivasan and Patricia Millett,
who are being
mentioned as possible
replacements for Scalia.
Outside, for much of the day,
the line stretched
around the block.
MAN: Someone who knew the law,
had the right
opinions about the law, and just
had the wit
to actually convey those
opinions in a way
that, like, stuck with you and,
like, made
an impression.
JEFF CULLER, Washington, D.C.: I
couldn't
be further from the polar
opposite of Justice
Scalia and a lot of his
philosophies. You
know, I'm probably as far to the
left as he
is to the right, but, you know,
that isn't
really important. When someone
dies, it's
just kind of time to put
politics aside.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Another
mourner, Benjamin
Williams, offered a bagpipe
tribute, as he
said he's done for senators and
congressmen
before.
This afternoon, President Obama
and the first
lady paid their respects. The
Obamas will
not attend tomorrow's funeral,
but Vice President
Biden and his wife will be there
at Washington's
Basilica of the National Shrine
of the Immaculate
Conception.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, an
offshoot Kurdish militant group
claimed responsibility
today for a suicide bombing that
rocked Turkey's
capital this week. The blast in
Ankara killed
28 people. The Kurdistan Freedom
Falcons said
it was revenge for Turkish
military assaults
on Kurdish rebels.
Prospects for peace in Syria
have dimmed even
further. The U.N.'s Syria envoy
today called
off peace talks planned for next
week. Staffan
de Mistura said he cannot
realistically arrange
negotiations right now. Fighting
has intensified
in the last week, with a new
offensive by
Syria's military and its allies,
backed up
by Russian bombing.
U.S. warplanes attacked an
Islamic State training
camp in Libya overnight and may
have killed
a top Tunisian militant. U.S.
officials say
that Noureddine Chouchane was
linked to last
year's attack on a museum in
Tunis that killed
22 people. A Pentagon spokesman
said he was
spotted at a site near the town
of Sabratha,
close to the border with
Tunisia.
PETER COOK, Pentagon Press
Secretary: This
group, and this particular
individual, who
had -- was named as a suspect
previously in
an attack in Tunisia, posed,
again, a threat
to Libya specifically, to
interests in the
region, and posed a national
security threat
to the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Video of the
aftermath showed
the destruction, and the
victims. Local officials
said more than 40 people were
killed, but
the Pentagon could not confirm
the number.
Israeli forces shot dead three
more Palestinians
today in an ongoing wave of
violence. The
Israeli military said one man
rammed a car
into Israeli troops in the West
Bank town
of Ramallah. Another fired on
soldiers near
Bethlehem. And a third stabbed
and wounded
two officers in Jerusalem. The
near-daily
attacks started last September.
European leaders say they have
reached an
agreement tonight that could
keep Britain
in the European Union. It came
after a two-day
summit in Brussels went into
overtime. Prime
Minister David Cameron said the
deal gives
Britain special status. The
summit outcome
could help Cameron win a summer
referendum
on remaining part of the E.U.
Vietnam and the Philippines are
the latest
to protest China's placement of
surface-to-air
missiles in the South China Sea.
The batteries
are deployed on Woody Island in
the Paracels.
It is controlled by China, but
also claimed
by Vietnam and Taiwan. The
Chinese said today
that they are acting in response
to American
actions.
HONG LEI, Spokesman, Chinese
Foreign Ministry
(through translator): The U.S.
has been continuously
increasing its military presence
in the South
China Sea by sending out
military aircraft
and ships. The U.S. has
repeatedly pressed
on its alliance and partners to
conduct joint
military exercises. These
actions have escalated
the tensions, meaning more
militarization
in this region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. has
criticized China's
missile move, and said that it
will continue
to insist on freedom of
navigation throughout
the region.
In Uganda, voting turned to
violence a day
after the country's presidential
election.
Angry protests broke out when
the main opposition
candidate was arrested again.
Police fired
tear gas and bullets into the
air to disperse
the crowds. The country's
president, Yoweri
Museveni, has held power for 30
years.
Back in this country, the last
of Louisiana's
Angola Three inmates was
released after more
than 40 years. Albert Woodfox
and two others
spent decades in isolation at
state prisons
in Angola and elsewhere. He was
twice convicted
of murder in the death of a
prison guard,
but the verdicts were
overturned. Woodfox
was awaiting a new trial when he
agreed to
plead no contest and go free at
the age of
69.
The state of Oregon is headed
towards the
highest minimum wage in the
country. A bill
to raise the wage over six years
won final
approval Thursday. It is the
first such measure
to set pay by region. By 2022,
Portland employees
will earn $14.75 an hour, while
workers in
rural areas will make $12.50.
And Wall Street finished the
week with mixed
results. The Dow Jones
industrial average
lost 21 points to close at
16392. The Nasdaq
rose nearly 17 points, and the
S&P 500 was
virtually unchanged.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
why winning
South Carolina is so important
to the GOP
candidates; Mark Shields and
David Brooks
take on a packed week of news; a
dangerous
journey for children seeking
refuge in Greece
with their families; and much
more.
Presidential candidates in both
parties are
down to less than 24 hours until
the next
two critical contests.
Today, they spent one last day
trying to make
their case, the Democrats in
Nevada and the
Republicans in South Carolina.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The pope was great. He made a
beautiful statement
this morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was Donald
Trump in Myrtle
Beach today, taking a softer
line after his
flare-up with Pope Francis. The
pontiff had
said Trump is not a Christian if
he advocates
building a wall along the
Mexican border.
DONALD TRUMP: They had him
convinced that
illegal immigration was like a
wonderful thing.
Not wonderful for us. It's
wonderful for Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In turn, the
Vatican said the
pontiff's comments were -- quote
-- "in no
way a personal attack, nor an
indication on
how to vote."
Trump, though, faced continuing
attacks from
his Republican rivals, while
defending a lead
that some polls suggest may be
shrinking.
Texas Senator Ted Cruz also
campaigned in
Myrtle Beach.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
It's easy to say make America
great again.
You can even print that on a
baseball cap.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. TED CRUZ: But the question
to ask is,
do you understand what made
America great
in the first place?
BARBARA BUSH, Former First Lady:
Jeb Bush.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For another
rival, Jeb Bush,
tomorrow could be make-or-break.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Thank
you, mom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He brought along
his mother,
former first lady Barbara Bush,
and took a
decidedly humble tack.
JEB BUSH: Thank you, lord, for
allowing me
to be a candidate, to be -- to
run for the
presidency of the United States
in the most
extraordinary country on the
face of the earth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats hold
their primary
in South Carolina next Saturday.
And, today,
Hillary Clinton picked up a
critical endorsement.
It came from Jim Clyburn, the
state's top
Democrat and first black
congressman since
Reconstruction.
REP. JAMES CLYBURN (D), South
Carolina: A
few people speculated that my
head was with
one candidate, and my heart with
the other.
That wasn't the case at all. My
heart has
always been with Hillary
Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last night, both
Clinton and
Bernie Sanders appeared in a
town hall in
Las Vegas hosted by MSNBC and
Telemundo. The
night's big focus, immigration.
Sanders was
asked to explain his 2007 vote
against a comprehensive
reform bill.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Included in that legislation was
a guest-worker
provision, which organizations
saw as almost
akin to slavery. Guest workers
came in, and
if they didn't do what their
bosses wanted
them to do, if they didn't
accept exploitation
and cheating, then they're going
to be thrown
out of this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Clinton
talked of continuing
President Obama's executive
actions that defer
the deportations of many
undocumented immigrants.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
And I will do everything I can
to make sure
that they are kept in place. As
you know,
there's a court action
challenging them. I
don't know what's going to
happen now because
of the Supreme Court situation.
But I will
renew them. I will go further,
if it's at
all legally possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Both Clinton and
Sanders stuck
to stumping in the Silver State
today, where
the race is neck and neck.
Democrats will
caucus there tomorrow, as
Republicans hold
their primary in South Carolina.
But the day wasn't over without
Trump making
another controversial statement.
He called
for a boycott of Apple products
until the
tech company complies with an
FBI order to
unlock a phone used by one of
the San Bernardino
shooters.
DONALD TRUMP: First of all,
Apple ought to
give the security for that
phone, OK? What
I think you ought to do is
boycott Apple until
such time as they give that
security number.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
DONALD TRUMP: How do you like --
I just thought
of -- boycott Apple.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Although Trump
seems to defy
conventions, South Carolina
history tells
us one thing for sure. The
Palmetto State
has a unique brand of
sharp-edged politics.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: The GOP race is
down to six
candidates, and they all know
the saying South
Carolina picks presidents.
JEB BUSH: You all have the
chance to reset
the race. That's what South
Carolinians have
done in the past.
SEN. TED CRUZ: And now South
Carolina is going
to play the role that it has
always played
in presidential race, the
historic role of
choosing presidents.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY (R), South
Carolina: We make
presidents. Let's make Marco
Rubio the next
president of the United States!
God bless!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: The Palmetto
State has voted
for the eventual Republican
nominee nearly
every year since 1980 from
Ronald Reagan to
John McCain. The lone exception?
Former House
Speaker Newt Gingrich in 2012.
NEWT GINGRICH (R), Former
Speaker of the House:
We want to run not a Republican
campaign.
We want to run an American
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: A surprise win,
but not enough
to carry him to the nomination.
Bruce Haynes is a Republican
strategist who
grew up in Florence.
BRUCE HAYNES, Republican
Strategist: South
Carolina, in the past, has gone
for more establishment
types, strong leaders typically
with a lot
of experience in politics. But
this time,
we may be turning a different
page.
LISA DESJARDINS: He is
referring, of course,
to Donald Trump, who's doubled
down in South
Carolina, with far more events
per day than
in Iowa or New Hampshire. He has
the same
strong words.
DONALD TRUMP: Who's the best on
the border?
It's Trump. Who's the best on
the economy
is Trump.
LISA DESJARDINS: Voters here
live with modern
growth that is leaving some
behind.
BRUCE HAYNES: There's a piece of
the state
that's still catching up. The
cut-and-sew
textile plants have shut down
and closed,
and those jobs have gone
overseas, which plays
right into the message that
Donald Trump is
delivering about trade, about
jobs and about
China.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, Ted
Cruz is counting
on help from the state's
evangelicals.
SEN. TED CRUZ: Father God,
please, continue
this awakening. Continue this
spirit of revival.
Awaken the body of Christ, that
we might pull
back from the abyss.
LISA DESJARDINS: South Carolina
is pivotal
because of the calendar. It's
the first presidential
vote in the South. But it is
important because
of numbers.
In 2012, nearly 600,000
Republicans voted
in the primary there. That's
more than Iowa
and New Hampshire combined. One
key part of
the political landscape, the
military. As
many as one in six voters in the
Palmetto
State is current military or a
veteran, and
the candidates clearly know it.
DONALD TRUMP: We are going to
make our military
so big, so strong, so powerful,
nobody's ever
going to have to mess with us,
folks.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Who could be complaining about
anything, when
you think about what these guys
endured over
there?
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
When I'm president, we're
rebuilding the U.S.
military.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: DuBose Kapeluck
teaches political
science at The Citadel and
believes Trump's
tough talk gives him an
advantage.
DUBOSE KAPELUCK, The Citadel:
The idea that
if you poke the United States,
we're going
to come back with full force,
overwhelming
force, and get the job done
militarily and
pull out, I think that is a
sentiment that
Trump expresses that resonates
well with our
people here in the military.
LISA DESJARDINS: True even after
Trump went
on the attack against former
President George
W. Bush.
DONALD TRUMP: The World Trade
Center came
down during the reign of George
Bush. He kept
us safe? That is not safe.
(BOOING)
DUBOSE KAPELUCK: You would
expect veterans
to be maybe inflamed about that
and upset,
but that didn't really faze
them. In fact,
you saw some sympathy for that
point of view,
which was, I think, telling.
LISA DESJARDINS: The state has a
sharp reputation
for what some would call
political tricks.
In just the past day, the Cruz
campaign posted
this photo that looks like Marco
Rubio shaking
hands with Barack Obama. But it
is Photoshopped
from a stock image that Twitter
users found.
The Cruz campaign later posted a
different,
undoctored photo, and said their
candidate
has been Photoshopped in others'
ads. And
more tricks could still be
ahead.
BRUCE HAYNES: They come,
frankly, on the weekend
during the primary, so the other
campaigns
don't have time to respond to
these attacks.
LISA DESJARDINS: Candidates now
have just
hours to try and survive the
battle for South
Carolina.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tight races in
South Carolina
and Nevada, the intersection of
politics and
religion, and a congressional
battle brewing
over an eventual Supreme Court
nominee.
We turn now to the analysis of
Shields and
Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Gentlemen, welcome.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good to see you.
So, David, today, it's Apple.
Yesterday, it
was the pope. Who gets the
better of this
exchange between Donald Trump
and the pontiff?
DAVID BROOKS: Everything sacred
in our world
is being attacked.
I think it's an accumulation of
things for
Trump. It's -- you start the
week attacking
George Bush and the Iraq War.
You call everybody
a liar. Then you have the pope
thing. Then
you have the Apple thing.
The question is, will fatigue
ever set in?
And some of the polls suggest
no. In some
the polls, he's still doing
solidly. But there
are another set of polls.
There's a stream
of polls, including the NBC/Wall
Street Journal
poll, which suggest it's
beginning to hurt
him and that he's beginning to
slide. There
is some exhaustion factor.
So I don't think it's one thing
that's -- but
it's the accumulation of
bombast. And there
may be this -- we may be getting
to the moment
-- and I thought he was
completely unhinged
in the debate Saturday night --
where that
begins to have some telling
effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see some
of the magic
maybe dissipating from Donald
Trump?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I agree with
David, first
of all, on the debate.
My only explanation for it is,
he was unnerved
by the public booing. And the
booing was so
sustained. And this is a man who
feeds off
the adulation of his own
rallies. There's
no way in the world you planned
going into
a national debate for
Republicans on national
television that you were going
to suggest
-- charge, not suggest -- charge
that the
last Republican president of the
United States
not only knew that there were no
weapons of
mass destruction, but took the
country into
war knowing that.
So, it was just -- it was really
bizarre,
beyond. As far as the pope is
concerned, it
will come as an enormous
surprise to Donald
Trump that the pope has probably
no idea who
he is. The question was, what
about someone
who advocates building walls,
rather than
building bridges, and closes off
any access
or really compassion to those
who are suffering
from forced migration and the
dispossessed?
And the pope said, that's
un-Christian, and
I think by just about any
definition. There
is an iron rule in American
politics about
the clergy, whether it's the
pope or a rabbi
or a minister. And that is, they
should never
interfere in politics, unless
they -- the
one exception being when they
agree with me
and my side.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: So I think that,
after John
McCain and Mexicans and Muslims
and Megyn
Kelly, the pope -- I wouldn't
put Apple in
the same category as a
sympathetic institution.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: But, at some
point, the accumulation
of the people he has just not
only made enemies
with, but denigrated, I think,
becomes a weight
too heavy for his candidacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, maybe
another problem
for Donald Trump, David, is the
endorsement
of Marco Rubio by the Governor
Nikki Haley
in South Carolina. Does
something like that
help Rubio? Does it move him?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think, in
general, endorsements
don't matter, but in this case
it matters,
I think, in part because of the
debate performance
from a couple of weeks ago where
his campaign
seemed to be in decline. This
helps revive
the story that he's on the
rebound.
And, indeed, if you look at the
polls, he's
on the rebound. To me, the most
interesting
story on the Republican side,
unless the polls
are completely wrong, Trump will
probably
win. But Rubio could beat Cruz
for second.
They seem neck and neck in most
of the polls.
And if Ted Cruz comes in second
in South Carolina,
an evangelical-heavy state, a
pretty conservative
state, that says something about
-- that says
something serious about the Cruz
candidacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
the Rubio/Cruz
thing? Cruz has been -- gotten
in trouble,
as Lisa just reported, Mark,
over those TV
spots he's been running. And he
has really
been in a tough back-and-forth
with both Trump
and with Rubio.
MARK SHIELDS: Did anybody notice
that they
were shaking hands with their
left hands?
That's how bad that was. It was
really a lousy
Photoshop job, in addition to
being cheap
and tawdry politics.
I think that, as a general rule,
endorsements,
unless it's the spouse of one
candidate endorsing
the opponent...
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: ... really don't
-- people don't
quite say, I was undecided. I
was either going
to vote between Kennedy and
Nixon, but the
lieutenant governor endorsed
Nixon, so I'm
going to vote for him.
But it's a very personal -- but
I do think
Nikki Haley may be the
exception. She's one
of the -- she's 4-1 favorable
among Republican
voters. She has a favorable
rating among African-American
voters, rare for any Republican
in the country,
let alone one in South Carolina.
And it's just really -- I think
it does give
him a little narrative that --
with Tim Scott
and Trey Gowdy, that he is on
the rebound
and coming back.
If, in fact, Ted Cruz, having
won Iowa and
finished third in New Hampshire
-- and it
was expected that once they went
below the
Mason-Dixon Line, you were
getting into his
favorable territory -- if he
finishes third,
I think it's a real setback for
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I have to ask you
both about
Jeb Bush, one of the so-called
establishment
trio. David, he had his brother
the former
president in there. He had his
mother, Barbara
Bush, as we just reported, in
there. What's
going on with Jeb Bush? Is this
helping him?
DAVID BROOKS: The press thought
Bush was coming
back until -- and he's -- I
think if he hangs
around 10, he can stay in until
Florida. He's
got the money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ten percent. Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: I think he's
performing well.
People have sort of closed their
mind, but
if he falls down to around 5 or
6, you know,
then, nationally, he's at 4, so
that's not
good. And so I think he can hang
around, just
because I -- he may feel...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even if he comes
in fourth
or fifth?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I see Mark
frowning at
me. And I hate to -- now I have
the lord judgment
upon me.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But I still think
he feels called
to hit back at Trump. I think he
would hate
to think that he wasn't there to
hit back
at Trump.
He, of course, would hurt the
anti-Trump cause
by getting out, but I'm sure
that's not how
he feels in his heart.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
That Wall Street Journal/NBC
poll that David
cited did an interesting thing.
They did matchups
if it did come down to two
candidates, if
it were Marco Rubio against
Trump, or it were
Ted Cruz against Trump. And both
of them would
beat Trump by 16 points, which
is pretty impressive,
56-40.
So there is a real ceiling
Donald Trump has.
The one candidate Donald Trump
did beat in
a matchup was Jeb Bush. And I
just think,
at some point, it becomes just
obvious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean in a
head-on-head,
head-to-head.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Do you want to go
home to Florida,
where you were a successful and
popular two-term
governor, and lose, and
especially if Marco
Rubio, the mentee, gets the
boost out of South
Carolina, and the mentor --
having finished
sixth in Iowa, fourth in New
Hampshire, I
mean, do you really continue
with another
fourth in South Carolina?
I think it becomes awfully
difficult, almost
painful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me move you
quickly to
the Democrats.
Nevada, they're voting in those
caucuses tomorrow.
David, both of you said last
week words to
the effect that you don't see
Hillary Clinton
has a rationale to her
candidacy. Seven days
later, do you still feel the
same way?
DAVID BROOKS: I do.
She's gone more aggressively in
trying to
use identity politics to trump
class politics,
which I don't think is a good
strategy in
2016. This is a very economic
class war they're
having. And secondly, the
interesting thing
about what's happening in Nevada
is that it's
close. It didn't seem that way
several weeks
ago.
And that's because Sanders has
done well with
Latinos. And it's interesting.
There is a
difference between the way
Latino voters are
reacting and African-American
voters, especially
in South Carolina. The
African-Americans are
still pretty solidly behind
Clinton, but the
Latino voters are not.
And so, assuming he does -- ties
or even wins,
the question will be whether
people in South
Carolina in African-American
communities,
in other communities are willing
to take another
look at him, because there's a
lot of people
who really haven't focused on
him yet.
And so, if he does win Nevada,
that changes
the storyline and gives him just
another -- just
another step up of what has been
a series
of pretty good steps over the
last six weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see
going on with
Clinton-Sanders?
MARK SHIELDS: I wish I could
disagree with
David.
I think that Bernie Sanders
right now is in
a period of momentum. And I
think what's interesting,
Hillary Clinton since April has
slipped in
overall polling by the Wall
Street Journal/NBC
poll -- they put up of their
surveys together
-- with every demographic group,
I mean, across
the board, age, income,
education, gender,
nationality, but particularly
among Latinos,
which there is no explanation
for it.
And her campaign, when New
Hampshire looked
sort of dreary, had boasted
openly that they
had a 25-point lead in Nevada,
raising expectations.
As far as her rationale, it's
basically it's
Hillary's turn. She's strong.
She's tested.
We live in a dangerous world,
and she's ready,
and you need somebody there who
is steady
and ready.
Or the third one is, do you want
Barack Obama's
third term? I promise you, I
will give that.
That seems to me to be the
rationale for her
candidacy at this point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And she was
making what appeared
to be an effort to nail down her
strong position
on immigration, on supporting...
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. She did have
one great
spot -- I don't know if you have
seen it -- where
the little Latino girl...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. Her parents
are going to
be deported. And Hillary Clinton
shows a kindness
and a compassion, a soft side,
which I think
has been missing totally from
her candidacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, I want
to come to
the death of the Supreme Court
Justice Antonin
Scalia.
David, reflections on him before
we talk about
the politics of it?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he was a
joyous spirit,
poker player, cigar, wine.
So, if you want to convert
people to your
side, you can issue court
opinions, but be
a pleasant spirit. And I'm
really impressed
by the court. We have so much
polarization.
They generally are friends with
each other
and they work hard on that. It's
a very impressive
institution.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. He -- Abner
Mikva, former
congressman from Illinois,
member of the Court
of Appeals, remember, when he
was nominated,
he said he had served...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A Democrat.
MARK SHIELDS: A Democrat.
When Antonin Scalia was
nominated to the Supreme
Court, he said, great guy, just
a terrific
guy. I disagree with him on
everything.
And I think that was it. He
never let the
disagreements define any
relationship. And
the one with Ruth Bader
Ginsburg, you see
the two of them laughing and
thoroughly enjoying
each other in an open and
natural way, which
is refreshing in Washington in
this particular
era.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think you could
see that
as they were standing there
today at the Supreme
Court.
There may not have been
disagreements that
way, but there certainly are
disagreements
politically, David, over what's
going to happen
now. The president says he's
going to nominate
someone. The Senate Republican
leadership
is saying, well, we're not going
to confirm
them. We may not even consider.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well, of
course they should
consider. He is president. And
the Constitution
says the president nominates,
and the Constitution
is there to put rules around our
struggles
for power.
John Marshall was nominated by
John Adams,
like, after the election had
already happened.
And so I think it's totally
fair. And the
Republicans are going to
probably get away
with not doing anything.
And, to me, what it will do --
and I don't
know the effect of this -- it
will polarize
the bases. It will create more
conflict. It
will elevate the social issues
on the Republican
side. It will elevate campaign
finance on
the Democratic side. And so it
will probably
have a polarizing effect on the
election.
If the candidacies are strong,
it would probably
help a Cruz and a Sanders
because of the issues
that would get elevated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Less than 30
seconds.
MARK SHIELDS: Oh, I think
Senator McConnell
could only have been trying to
appeal to the
restive, restless, angry
Republican primary
voters who are so disappointed
in the Republicans
in Congress, that they said they
haven't overturned,
they have been rolled by Obama.
He was going
to step out.
Before the body was cold, before
condolences
were offered to the family, he
announced that
there would be -- regardless,
made no difference
whom the president nominated. It
was -- and
he got a number of Republicans
in tough races
to follow him, I mean, Senator
Ayotte in New
Hampshire, Senator Portman in
Ohio, Senator
Johnson in Wisconsin.
They're all -- they made a big
mistake. That
is not the American tradition.
And I think
it was a misstep politically.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you get the
last word.
Mark Shields, David Brooks, we
thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
NPR's Steve Inskeep guides us
through his
time in Iran; and remembering
"To Kill a Mockingbird"
Author Harper Lee.
But, first, new figures from the
United Nations
show that an average of two
children have
drowned every day since last
September, as
their families attempted the
perilous crossing
from Turkey to Greece.
This week alone, off the Greek
island of Lesbos,
more than 900 people have been
rescued at
sea.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant accompanied
European Union border police
this week as
they patrolled the Aegean Sea,
and he was
there when dozens of those
people were saved.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dawn at Molyvos
in northern
Lesbos, where traditional
rhythms of island
life coexist with the new.
Portuguese maritime police
attached to Frontex,
the E.U.'s border agency,
they're heading
out on patrol. So far this year,
despite winter
weather, more than 50,000
migrants have made
the five-mile crossing from
Turkey to Lesbos,
driven by the war intensifying
in Syria.
Frontex spokesman Chris
Borowski:
CHRIS BOROWSKI, Frontex: Frontex
is supporting
the Greeks in both patrolling
their waters
and then, in the end, once the
migrants arrive,
we're registering them to make
sure that we
have counted all of them and
that we have
-- we know who's coming across
the border.
They're registered, counted,
their nationalities
are determined, and the point is
to kind of
know who's coming into Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But how is that
protecting
Europe's borders?
CHRIS BOROWSKI: The bottom line
is that it's
up to the Greeks to protect the
borders here.
We're here to support them in
any way we possibly
can.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For more than a
week, the
Portuguese have not seen any
migrants. The
police don bulletproof life
jackets, in case
they encounter violent
smugglers, or worse.
There's a boat in distress. The
skipper cranks
up the engines to 45 knots.
The calm weather is perfect for
crossing from
Turkey. Other European civilian
volunteers
have already arrived to ensure
there's no
loss of life. This is a familiar
scenario.
The cheap outboards either die
mid-channel,
or the migrants cut the engines
and call for
help by mobile phone.
There's a problem with the
engine, they shout.
The dinghy is carrying 58
people, including
18 mainly small children. The
Portuguese prime
concern is that, in their haste
to get off,
the refugees will destabilize
the vessel and
it will capsize.
MAN: Hold the line. You hold the
line here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Scores of
people have drowned
in these waters so far this
year. As many
as 4,000 died in 2015.
Where are both of you from?
MAN: From Syria.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes.
What do you think of this? What
do you think
of the way that you're being
met?
MAN: It's good, good. Thank you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The gentle sea
state helps
the Portuguese agents.
MAN: Today, it's them. Tomorrow,
maybe Portuguese
can need people, too. So, we
have to take
care of each other.
MAN: A normal day. The boat have
a problem
with the engine. It cannot move.
The people
inside, we have too many
children, two sick
guys, in this case, we have to
put on board
and take them ashore to have a
medical test.
MAN: You wait. You wait for us
to call you,
OK? Wait. Wait. Wait. Wait.
Wait.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Like many of
those on board,
Abdullah Harmoush is from
Latakia on Syria's
coast, the home town of
President Bashar al-Assad.
ABDULLAH HARMOUSH, Refugee:
There are many
troubles in my city because of
the violence,
and it's that we couldn't stay
there in Syria.
So, we left Syria to take
refugee. It was
a very good response from the
police. We was
very afraid in the sea, but when
we entered
the water of Greece, we have the
support very
quickly. We are expecting very,
very fast
response from the police in the
sea from Greece.
It's really an amazing feel that
we -- at
the time we entered the water of
Greece, we
are rescued, and we are very,
very, very happy
about it, here in this boat.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Acting as
purely a rescue
service, which is what you're
doing, aren't
you actually encouraging more
people to come
because they know they're going
to be safe?
CHRIS BOROWSKI: We do not
encourage people
to come here. We're here to help
patrol the
waters. And once the migrants
cross in, we
are -- if it's a
search-and-rescue operation,
we have to help them get to the
-- get on
the boats, and then we have to
allow them
to come to Greece to then
register them and
allow them to seek asylum.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But some of the
people on
this boat were saying, we knew
we were going
to be rescued, so we just set
off. So isn't
that just encouraging people?
CHRIS BOROWSKI: What we are
doing is, we are
supporting the Greeks in
patrolling their
borders and we are doing all we
can to both
make sure that we both register
everybody
who comes here and rescuing
those who needs
-- who needs rescues.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the past 10
days, NATO
has deployed to reinforce
Europe's borders.
There are five ships out in the
international
waters of the Aegean Sea, which
divided Greece
from Turkey.
Now, NATO insists that it's not
going to be
intercepting refugee boats and
turning them
back. They will adhere to
international treaties,
which require them to go to the
help of people
in distress upon the sea. That
means that
people picked up by NATO vessels
will be returned
to Turkey.
Will this strategy work?
Professor Christodoulos
Yiallouridis, dean of Athens'
Panteion University,
believes it could make a
difference.
CHRISTODOULOS YIALLOURIDIS,
Panteion University
(through translator): NATO can't
stop them
coming. She can, however, assist
in restricting
the flow of migrants simply
because of her
presence. It will be known that
NATO is waiting
for them, and this should act as
a deterrent.
MALCOLM BRABANT: NATO didn't
deter these 90
Afghans picked up by the Greek
coast guard.
How do you feel about being in
Europe?
MAN: We are feeling good. Good.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Among them,
Edriss Bayat,
who used to work as an
administrator for NATO
in Afghanistan.
EDRISS BAYAT, Refugee: What do
you think about
the way Europe is reacting to
the refugee
crisis?
Well, I think they are doing a
good job. At
least, they are -- they know
that who is entitled
to seek the assistance. And, for
example,
we come from Afghanistan, Iraq,
Syria, and
they are the people who very --
really need
to leave their country and --
because save
their life.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But why
couldn't you stay
in another country like Turkey,
for example?
Why did you have to come to
Europe?
EDRISS BAYAT: Well, there is a
lot of issues
in Turkey, for example,
job-wise. They are
not giving you the immigrants.
You cannot
get like a permanent visa or a
Turkish passport
or anything.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Where do you
want to go in
Europe? What do you want to do?
ABDULLAH HARMOUSH: For me, I
want to continue
my study and have a good future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Do you want to
stay in Europe,
or do you want to go back to
Syria? What do
you want to do?
ABDULLAH HARMOUSH: Of course,
when the war
is over, I will come back to my
country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And what do you
want to do
for your country when you...
ABDULLAH HARMOUSH: OK. Rebuild
it.
EDRISS BAYAT: I really wish to
have a safe
country. If our country gets
safe, we will
go back.
MALCOLM BRABANT: European Union
nations are
doing all they can to stem the
migrant tide,
but, as Middle Eastern violence
threatens
to draw in Turkey, the flow
shows no sign
of abating.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Lesbos.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iranians will go
to the polls
next week to elect a new
parliament and to
choose the small group that will
pick the
next supreme leader.
One of our colleagues from NPR
is just back
from a reporting trip to Iran,
and William
Brangham has that conversation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The signing of
the landmark
nuclear deal with Iran was
supposed to begin
a new era of relations between
Iran and the
West. The deal would free Iran
from decades
of crippling economic sanctions,
while giving
the West some confidence that
Iran won't be
able to develop a nuclear
weapon.
Many in the United States,
however, remain
wary of Iran's intentions,
including virtually
all the Republican candidates
running for
president. They all vow to
renegotiate the
agreement.
But what is happening inside
Iran?
National Public Radio's Steve
Inskeep is just
back from a reporting trip, and
he joins me
now.
Steve, welcome back. And welcome
to the show.
STEVE INSKEEP, National Public
Radio: Thanks.
Glad to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The nuclear
deal has been
signed. Iran is freed somewhat
from these
sanctions.
What is it like there? Are
things getting
better for Iranians?
STEVE INSKEEP: No, not in
day-to-day life,
not yet.
In fact, in talking with people
on the street,
which I find to be one of the
most productive
things to do when traveling to
Iran, I find
a lot of pessimism. People have
gone through
years of economic suffering.
Many people have
disagreed with the political
direction of
their government.
And even though things are
moving, in their
point of view, in a more
optimistic direction,
it's very slow. And of course
it's too early
to see any concrete economic
results from
the end of sanctions that just
happened a
few weeks ago.
There was a time when people
were saying just
the anticipation of the end of
sanctions was
improving Iran's economy, but
that seems not
to have trickled down to
ordinary people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But I don't
understand.
Rouhani was elected in no small
part to eliminate
sanctions, to improve relations
with the West,
to try to make the economy
better. Is this
the sense that it's not
happening fast enough
or not enough?
STEVE INSKEEP: That is exactly
right.
There is this residue of support
for Hassan
Rouhani. I even found people in
centers of
support for the prior president,
who was very
different, who said, yes, I
support Rouhani.
I'm with Rouhani.
But I think more liberal people
or Western-facing
people who want much greater
openness, who
want much greater change have
been disappointed
not to see more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And I know, in
one of your
reports this week, you reported
on how there
are certainly still some people
in Iran who
don't want any of those changes
to occur.
What is it that they're afraid
of?
What is it that they're worried
-- if business
starts to flourish, if the
economy gets better?
Help me understand what the
concern is.
STEVE INSKEEP: Well, on a basic
level, they're
afraid of us. They're afraid of
the United
States.
This was a government that was
founded on
a few basic principles, and one
of them was
opposition to the United States.
And the United
States was blamed for many of
Iran's previous
problems before 1979. There's
been a longstanding
rivalry. They're aware of
profound distrust
in the United States of Iran.
And so you have two governments
that are very
much at odds on everything other
than the
nuclear deal. And so, on one
level, it's as
simple as that. On another
level, you have
a government, a clerical-led
government, that
has elections, that has a
semblance of democracy,
but that knows it is not
fundamentally supported
by a lot of people.
Some people might say the
majority of Iranians
oppose the government. I can't
go that far.
I don't know what the numbers
are. But it's
clear there is a lot of
cynicism, a lot of
disappointment with this
government, and a
lot of impatience with this
government.
And if you're in charge, you
know that. And
so you wonder what's going to
happen next.
You don't want things to go the
wrong way
and for your government to fall.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things that,
in the West, we like to tell
ourselves is
that it was the economic
sanctions that crippled
their economy and brought Iran
to the negotiating
table.
And one of your reports really
detailed this
-- the cynicism almost that
people think that
some of the problems within Iran
might have
been because of corruption and
mismanagement
within their own government.
STEVE INSKEEP: Oh, yes. No, this
was really
interesting.
It was a talking point for
Iranians during
sanctions: Your sanctions aren't
really hurting
us too much. It's other things
that are going
on here.
But it's also something that a
lot of Iranians
firmly, genuinely believe, that
there were
ways that they found to get
around economic
sanctions. And, by the way,
during all my
visits over the last several
years, I have
stories about people finding
ways to sell
carpets to Germany, people
finding ways to
sell petrochemicals to China, in
spite of
various sanctions.
So, certain things did happen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Big ingenious
population
in Iran.
STEVE INSKEEP: Yes, exactly. And
you can get
around economic sanctions, to an
extent, although
they were more and more
punishing over time.
But what has been harder to get
around is
that sense of mismanagement of
the economy,
hyperinflation in the economy,
36,000 Iranian
rials for $1, 36,000. And it was
much, much
less just a few years ago.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
incredible.
STEVE INSKEEP: And so you have
serious problems
in the economy, and you have a
clear sense
of corruption, that some of
these government
entities that are deeply
involved in the economy
also take a cut.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We know
there's elections
coming up at the end of next
week. And in
typical Iranian fashion, a whole
slew of people
who wanted to run were told, you
can't run,
reasons unstated.
But what are you looking for in
particular
in that election next week?
STEVE INSKEEP: Yes.
When you say typical Iranian
fashion, it's
the system. It's officially the
system.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
STEVE INSKEEP: There's a group
called the
Guardian Council that is there
to disqualify
candidates who are considered
not Islamic
enough or not enough with the
Islamic Revolution
and whatever else.
And you're correct that they're
not very transparent
about their reasons for people
being disqualified.
We don't even know -- or I don't
at this moment
-- maybe somebody does --
exactly who is in
or out.
We know that many people were
disqualified.
There are elections for the
Assembly of Experts
this time. The Assembly of
Experts is charged
with overseeing the supreme
leader, to the
extent that anybody does. That's
the body
that elects the supreme leader.
That's the
body that, at least in theory,
could remove
or impeach, as Americans would
say, the supreme
leader, if there was some
incapacity or he
couldn't do his job.
So it's considered vitally
important who gets
on that panel, who chooses the
next supreme
leader. Let's remember that this
is a system
was designed, rather like the
American system,
with lots of checks and
balances. Any new
leader of that country would
still inherit
that system with all of its
checks and balances.
It would be very hard to move
Iran in any
direction but the direction it's
in now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Steve Inskeep
from National Public Radio,
thank you for
your reporting. Thanks being
here.
STEVE INSKEEP: Glad to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
the loss of
a literary legend reclusive in
life, but renowned
for crafting one of the great
American novels.
And to Jeffrey Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: Harper Lee was a
little known
writer living in New York when
"To Kill a
Mockingbird" was published in
1960. The book
would win the Pulitzer Prize a
year later,
sell more than 30 million copies
in 40 languages,
and be read and loved by
generations.
Its fame grew with the 1962 film
version starring
Gregory Peck as Atticus Finch,
father of the
young narrator, Scout, and a
lawyer in a segregated
Alabama town who defends a black
man against
a rape charge.
In a 1964 radio interview, Lee
said this about
"Mockingbird"'s enormous
success:
HARPER LEE, Author, "To Kill a
Mockingbird":
My reaction to it wasn't one of
surprise.
It was one of sheer numbness. It
was like
being hit over the head and
knocked cold.
(LAUGHTER)
HARPER LEE: I never expected
that the book
would sell in the first place.
JEFFREY BROWN: But in the
decades that followed,
Lee did little or no talking. It
was news
when she went to the White House
in 2007 to
accept a Presidential Medal of
Freedom.
Instead, she lived quietly most
of her life
in the town of Monroeville,
Alabama. And while
readers waited, no other books
came, until
the surprise this past summer of
"Go Set a
Watchman," a book described as
written before
"Mockingbird," but only
discovered and published
55 years later.
It drew more readers, mixed
reviews, and many
questions about the
circumstances of its writing
and publication.
Harper Lee died in her sleep
last night. She
was 89 years old.
And joining us now is novelist
and short story
writer Allan Gurganus. His books
include "Oldest
Living Confederate Widow Tells
All," "Plays
Well With Others," and most
recently "Local
Souls."
Allan, welcome to you.
What explains the popularity in
the end of
"To Kill a Mockingbird"?
ALLAN GURGANUS, Author, "Local
Souls": I think
it's a fable about the
extraordinarily difficult
subject of race that presents
itself with
charm and a kind of innocence
that makes the
investigation acceptable and
beguiling.
I think the name Scout of the
child is appropriate.
She's our representative in this
strange moral
morass that she finds herself
in. And I think
she's spoken to a lot of people
over the years.
JEFFREY BROWN: And set in its
particular time,
when you think of both the
historical qualities
and for you, as a writer, its
writing qualities.
ALLAN GURGANUS: It's a book with
a lot of
precision, a lot of poetic
passages about
small-town life that rings
completely true,
as somebody who grew up in a
small town.
But I think, ethically, the
questions are
strenuous and difficult and
interesting. And
that combination of giving us
candy and salt
at the same time has made the
book so popular.
It's also short, which is great
for junior
high school readers.
(LAUGHTER)
ALLAN GURGANUS: But it manages
to pull heartstrings
and ask big, big questions.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not to be
underemphasized,
the length of a book sometimes,
right?
What about Harper Lee the
author?
ALLAN GURGANUS: No, and
especially for young
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about Harper
Lee the author
and the sort of -- the mythology
of the -- that
came to surround her as writing
this one book,
all but disappearing, people
waiting endlessly
for another book?
ALLAN GURGANUS: I think she was
a very shy,
charming person used to living
in a very small
town, where everybody knew her,
and the attention
that she got when this novel
came out and
became a bestseller for 88 weeks
was overwhelming.
She was also protecting her
private life,
her sexual life, which is a
decision that
I respect. And she just made a
decision not
to go public. I think the
pressure of following
a book that wins the Pulitzer
Prize can't
be overestimated.
And she was -- I think had set
out to write
a book that mythologized her
father, her actual
lawyer father, in a way that met
her own standards.
He still spoke to her after she
had written
the book. And she was pleased
with what she
had done. And I think her
mission was in some
ways complete.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then, of
course, there's
the "Go Set a Watchman," a very
strange episode,
many questions that came about,
whether it
was an early draft of
"Mockingbird," whether
she had agreed or should have
agreed to its
publication.
What, in the end, do you think
that we should
take from that?
ALLAN GURGANUS: I think every
writer has two
or three novels hidden away in
drawers and
closets that would ruin their
literary reputation.
And for somebody to come in late
in your game
and public those with only half
of your permission
may be a smart move in terms of
moneymaking,
but it was a devastating blow to
her reputation.
A lot of boys had been named
Atticus, and
people actually went to court to
have their
sons named changed when the
Atticus in the
second book turned out to be a
conventional
racist like the other people on
the town council.
So I think it was a mistake for
her reputation.
But the singular book that she
will be remembered
for is the "Mockingbird."
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. I was going
to say, so,
briefly, the legacy really, you
just think,
should be defined by one this
book, but what
a book it was.
ALLAN GURGANUS: What a book it
was.
And to think that it came out in
1960, just
before the huge riots and the
German shepherds
and the fire hoses in the South,
I think it
taught white America how to
think about race.
And we needed an innocent child
to lead us
into that difficult and complex
subject.
And it made the prophecy of what
was coming
palatable and easy to understand
and digest.
So, it served an extraordinary
function, and
it's to be remembered and
treasured, I think.
JEFFREY BROWN: Allan Gurganus on
the life
and work of Harper Lee, thank
you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: when
Bernie Sanders was growing up in
the Midwood
section of Brooklyn in the
1940s, many of
his neighbors were first- and
second-generation
Jewish immigrants from Eastern
Europe.
Today, it's still home to a mix
of immigrants
and a growing number of
Hispanics, but many
have very different political
views than the
Vermont senator. We visited the
working-class
neighborhood recently, and you
can read that
profile on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
programs from our
PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill's preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later tonight.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: We take you inside
Justice Scalia's
chambers and directly into the
controversy
that has sprung up in the wake
of his sudden
passing. Plus, tomorrow, the
Democrats take
on Nevada, as Republicans duke
it out in South
Carolina, how firewalls,
endorsements and
polls will play out when voters
finally have
their say.
That's tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday:
What happens when Wal-Mart
closes a store
and leaves town?
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
the latest in the presidential
race after
voters in South Carolina and
Nevada have their
say.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.